The aim is to develop a basic speech recognition system for Malayalam, having the ability to recognize the fundamental units of speech in Malayalam.The software receives sound signals from the microphone and that is compared with each of the fundamental speech units of Malayalam , using the characteristics formant frequencies of each of these units.The system will be a phoneme detection based Speech recognition system and will support large vocabulary.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
> The aim of this project is to have the first step in speech recognition in Malayalam by recognizing the Basic Constituents of speech in this language.This project along with a word level interpreter can handle user commands, which will be a better input device than the conventional keyboard and mouse.
> Malayalam is the principal language of the south Indian state of Kerala and also of the Lakshwadeep islands.It is considered to be a language of Dravidian family.Malayalam was influenced by Sanskrit also. It absorbed a lot from Sanskrit, not only in the lexical level, but also in the phonemic, morphemic and grammatical levels of language.

STRUCTURE OF MALAYALAM LANGUAGE
> The scientific approach of ancient Indians are quite evident even in the structure of Malayalam alphabets.Unlike English,Alphabets of Malayalam are classified according to the mechanism of speech production through our vocal system. The vowels are realized as letters which origins from the vocal chord.Consonants are realized as sounds formed by the action of vocal tract.The division of consonants are even more interesting.The consonants are divided into five groups each containing five letters.These five sections are grouped in accordance with which part of vocal tract is performing the production of that group of sounds.And more than that, each letters in these five groups differ with the consequent letter in a similar fashion.Thus the place of a particular letter in the whole list of Malayalam alphabets itself says about the parts(or mechanism) of our vocal system involved in production of that sound.
The application will identify each phoneme the user utters. There is a one-to-one mapping between the phoneme and the grapheme in Malayalam. With the help of a word interpreter which corrects the recognized words with the help of a vocabulary collection the speech is transformed to text format.